---
layout: post
title: How Angeltax took away wings
description: There are no elevators to the top. Setting a goal to become an entrepreneur isn’t a big deal, but, actually becoming and sustaining it requires loads of efforts. 
date: 2019-05-10
featured: no
---
Every individual gets
some ideas, but only some can convert them into reality. For
a startup, there are various ways to get funded. One of them
is Angel Funding. There are various investors in the market
who are willing to fund potential startups and the demand for
this kind of funding is relatively high due to the kind of
development these investors provide in the form of advice
and consultations and their contacts in the corporate world
help to escalate business towards growth. These angel
investors also expect a high return on investment.

India is the second biggest hub for startups. According to
NASSCOM, more than 1200 startups came up in 2018,
taking the total number to 7,200 startups. Contradicting the
the vision of promoting entrepreneurship, the startup sector is
now getting pinged under tax scrutiny which is levied on
angel investments and is harmful to its financial health.
Angel tax is the 30.9% income tax payable on the capital
which is raised by startups via an issue of shares at a valuation
where the price is excess of its fair market value. It is the
name given to the provision on share premium and income
from other sources under section 56(2)(vii b) of the
income tax act to prevent money laundering.
The valuation of the startup based on the negotiation
between the company and the investor and has no definite
way. The investors look at the business potential whereas the
officials look at the net asset value of the firm. So, when the
valuation of them is high, the startups have to face a higher tax
burden. This issue started to fuel up when more than 70%
startups started receiving notices to pay tax and to furnish
details on their source of income, bank account statements
and other financial data. Section 68 says that a startup should
be able to prove the genuineness of the source of
investments received and of the source
of such money in the investor’s hands.

The government has decided to form small working groups
to assess the much-debated angel tax and has also
liberalized the conditions for startups and investors to shield
them which included a simpler mechanism for startups to
claim exemption from this tax. The certification from the
inter-ministerial board has been done away with. They have
to be recognized with the Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion (DIPP) to be eligible for a concession for shares
and an application to be sent which will be evaluated within
45 days by the Central Board of Direct Taxes. The
exemption might come up with the condition that these
startups submit an undertaking that they do not launder black
money and are not shell companies. 300-400 startups get funded every year, out of which less than 10% have received
these exemptions.

