---
layout: post
title: How WeChat is Changing Your Internet?
description: China does not have the same internet as we do. It is more of an ‘intranet’,  
image: /blog/wechat.jpeg
date: 2019-10-29
featured: no
---

in contrast to the internet that we use. The Chinese government has walled the internet in China from the rest of the world with the help of an incredibly complex system of filters and blocks which is also famously called “The Great Firewall”. The Communist Party of China uses The Great Firewall to block any site that it cannot control and that’s the reason why China does not have Facebook, Google, YouTube, Whatsapp or Twitter. This has given birth to a number of Chinese copycats which today have grown into huge companies. For Google there is Baidu, for YouTube, there is Youku and for Twitter, there is Sina Weibo, the list is endless. 

But why do we have to care about the Chinese rip-offs? Well, in order to know how the internet will develop, it is very important for us to study them. 

One of these rip-offs is WeChat which was developed by Tencent in 2011. Started as a copy of Whatsapp, today around 80% of the Chinese use WeChat (approximately 1 billion people). One may call WeChat the ‘Swiss Knife’ of applications. WeChat does it all! The work of Whatsapp, Facebook, Venmo, UrbanClap, Skype, Uber, Instagram, Amazon, and Tinder. Not only this, but WeChat also has features for which we don’t even have apps, for instance, there are hospitals that have whole appointment booking system, investment services and there are even heat maps that show how crowded a place is like a shopping mall or a tourist site. The amazing thing about WeChat is that all these services are provided by ONE APP! This allows the customer to do everything- from buying a product, posting about it, reviewing it, paying for it, investing the remaining savings and texting about it to their friends all using a single app. This raises the concept of ‘Virality’ which is the tendency of an image, video, or piece of information to be circulated rapidly and widely from one Internet user to another; the quality or fact of being viral. 

The amount of data generated from WeChat is more than the data generated by Google, Facebook, and Amazon together. This data is gold for the advertisers. But the problem here is that this data is used by the Chinese government for various purposes, often leading to Human Rights violations.

Similar problems have also started to arise for us. Under the influenced of WeChat, ironically, western apps have started copying it. For instance, Facebook is coming up with its own cryptocurrency, Whatsapp introduced the feature of video call and Google came up with its payment app. This trend is dangerous for us because such volume and type of personal data in the hands of private businesses can be misused. It may lead to companies and governments tracking each and every movement of the citizens. How this trend of ‘super apps’ turn out will be interesting to watch.

