---
layout: post
title: Neobank the bank of the future
description: NeoBank is defined in a very fluid manner it is a bank that provides seamless access to a host of financial services
image: /blog/overvaluation.jpeg
date: 2020-02-23
featured: no
---

The defining characteristics are two: No brick and mortar branches & no banking licenses. The former of which brings down profitability drastically for traditional banks. Sounds fairly efficient – eliminate the lease rentals and you can give out higher savings interest. People will flock to this bank and soon enough you have a high number of investors – all dying to invest in the bank.

Where’s the catch? Well for starters offering banking services in India requires licenses which are extremely difficult to obtain. Hence, most of these players latch on to existing banks and augment their interest rates with the savings on costs of physical presence. These NeoBanks basically let you use the existing infrastructure at lesser cost.

Now that’s where things start to get interesting. Imagine if NeoBanks started making use of all the same infrastructure but offered you more. Better credit, higher interest rate payout and financial analytics – at a cheaper service fee. Could these then be profitable?

Look closely, and you will see that underneath all of this glamour, we are just looking at a rental play. NeoBanks will “rent” the existing infrastructure provided by the traditional banks and try to work with lower resources – lower manpower and higher automation. If by now you haven’t started seeing this as nothing but a process re-engineering, let’s take it one step further.

All NeoBanks offer 4 services that differentiate them:

Low fee checking accounts
Cheap and easy credit
Financial analytics
Seamless customer service

The first is a price play – not sustainable as a competitive advantage. The second is very niche – a player like EarlySalary is using similar data services to provide cheap and easy credit, complex financial services cannot be disbursed via these platforms and whence they try and disburse higher credit – we are going to enter a similar situation like the credit market of China. Great pomp with no substance.

The third is extremely valuable. As businesses grow, they are able to afford complex analytics and optimize payout sizes and inventory management. A NeoBank catering to SMEs will definitely help them avail these services for cheap. The last is seamless customer service – frankly $100mn investment to replace the so-called COBOL based infra and rejig the entire system. Does not justify the $1bn poured into the system in the last 2 years as per some reports.

So underneath all the fancy, what we’re looking at are 2 genuine services which can be provided without all the joomla. The problem with that? Very simple – Valuation.

There are case studies of companies with fairly similar vision that struggled to raise $50mn but soon after rebranding the enterprise from financial analytics & artificial intelligence based niche lending to NeoBank, the cap table became a lot more interesting – inviting $100mn pitch ins – firm value at $5bn.

Within the global market, these companies are expected to generate some degree of profit because of their command on the same PayPal model. They plan to monetize the 1% service fee charged from retailers. Seems very fair, but assuming a 100% income earned is expensed, you’re still looking at probably 0.25% increase in intrest rate that is sustainable, with 0.75% accounting for charges of financial analytics and the platform fee. In addition, these platforms plan to levy a single service charge. As the number of customers grows, there is a healthy bottomline we can see here.

In the Indian context however, things are not so easy. Indian players with similar structures will face major problems. Much of India’s economy still works offline, and even within that, firms like PayTM have had to provide a 100% direct transfer to bysinesses to break into the market. The Indian small business will certainly take cash to taking payment via digital mode if that implies a 2% cut. This renders all small payments outside the scope of the revenue for the proposed business. It also means that the same SMEs it is trying to target for use of it’s valuable financial analytics platform will not use the service.

Another important consideration is the management of money. The Indian banks that are able to transform themselves with similar such digital offerings will most likely not want to partner with NeoBanks in the longer run and the banks that use their licenses as a leverage to get these deals have much higher chances of going bust. Thus the faith that backs the fiat currency would be extremely doubtful. Given that a NeoBank is a probable equity partner and not a customer of the bank, the claims of the consumer of a NeoBank – which does not have to abide to strict Capital Adequacy Norms will fall at a level of negligible recovery in the case of default. Even in the case the books were to show the NeoBank or its customers as a depositor, the claims of small time NeoBank target market will not get desired safety.

Most important concern is the regulator’s approach. RBI has pushed even Payment Banks to have some offline presence and it will view this so-called NeoBank with a similar approach. With an offline presence and severe restrictions on investment (like in the case of payments banks) – there will be none to little money left to be made for a NeoBank and hence makes it an unviable business.

The solution? NeoBanks should work for selling the platform with large contracts for maintenance and equity stake in the bank. Instead of a fixed payout, they can have a variable interest margin payout similar to their target revenue with larger size. This would make the holding firm for all such equity valuable and eliminate all the worries facing these firms. Surely the founder will go home with slightly less money, but when the venture bubble bursts – she will still be afloat.

